Separate out primitives (#4640)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/guides/qiskit-runtime-primitives.mdx

---
title: Introduction to primitives
description: Introduction to primitives in Qiskit Runtime, and an explanation of available primitives
---

# Introduction to primitives

Primitives were created to simplify the most common tasks for quantum computers: namely, sampling quantum states and calculating expectation values. The first Qiskit Runtime primitives ([`EstimatorV2`](/docs/api/qiskit-ibm-runtime/estimator-v2) and [`SamplerV2`](/docs/api/qiskit-ibm-runtime/sampler-v2)) are implementations of the Qiskit [primitives base classes](/docs/guides/primitives). They provide a more sophisticated implementation (for example, by including error mitigation) as a cloud-based service and are used to access IBM Quantum&reg; hardware.

The newest Qiskit Runtime primitive, [Executor](https://qiskit.github.io/qiskit-ibm-runtime/stubs/qiskit_ibm_runtime.Executor.html) (which is in beta), provides a lower-level interface that gives more visibility and control without sacrificing performance.

<CardGroup>
    <Card
      title="Estimator"

>       description="Computes the expectation values for one or more observables with respect to states prepared by quantum circuits."

Reviewer: We should also mention it has built-in error suppression and mitigation methods.

      href="/docs/guides/get-started-with-estimator"
      analyticsName="Get started with Estimator"
      linkText="Get started with Estimator"
    />

    <Card
      title="Sampler"
      description="Samples the output register from the execution of one or more quantum circuits."
      href="/docs/guides/get-started-with-sampler"
      analyticsName="Get started with Sampler"
      linkText="Get started with Sampler"
    />

        <Card
      title="Executor (beta)"

>       description="Samples output registers from quantum circuit executions, but it does not have any built in error suppression or mitigation, giving you full control and transparency."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      description="Samples output registers from quantum circuit executions based on input directives and gives you full control and transparency over customizing error mitigation methods."
```

We should emphasize the control and transparency and less on it not having built in mitigation 😄
